[Music]
Panama introduction
the indictment of general Manuel Antonio
Noriega on federal narcotics charges in
late January 1988 did not come as a
surprise to either the executive branch
or the Congress by the time general
Noriega was indicted the United States
government had received substantial
information about the criminal
involvement of top Panamanian officials
for nearly 20 years and done little to
respond the failure of US officials to
act was largely the result of the
relationships Panamanian officials had
developed with US intelligence and law
enforcement agencies and performing
services for them on a variety of
matters including drug enforcement it
was also a consequence of the desire of
US officials to maintain good relations
with the Panamanian government during
the negotiation and ratification period
of the new Panama Canal treaties during
the Nixon Ford and Carter
administration's and it was a
consequence of general Noriega provision
of Panamanian help with the Contras
during the Reagan administration the
subcommittee has reached these
conclusions on the basis of sworn
testimony from former US officials
responsible for handling US policy
toward Panama Panamanian officials who
formerly worked with general Noriega and
drug traffickers who had been in the
narcotics business with the Panamanian
dictator the testimony of both the
former Panamanian officials and the drug
traffickers associated with Noriega were
used by the federal government as the
basis for the Noriega indictments in
addition the subcommittee received
testimony from drug traffickers who
entered into agreements with general
Noriega to move drugs or launder money
significant information essential to
reaching a more complete understanding
of the evolution of US policy to Noriega
has been kept from the congress by the
executive branch in april 1988 Senator
Kerry asked the General Accounting
Office to review relevant files in the
US agencies involved with Panama policy
to determine the process by which that
policy was made
in July the National Security Council
denied the GAO access to the files
necessary to complete the job on the
grounds of national security
the NSC ordered all relevant agencies to
withhold their files on Panama from the
GAO as a consequence the subcommittee
has not been able to undertake a full
analysis of how the Noriega problem was
handled by the u.s. prior to his
indictment the subcommittee believes it
is essential that the new administration
make it possible for the GAO to follow
through with its review of past US
policy toward Panama origins of
corruption and money laundering until
1968 Panamanian politics were dominated
by a small group of leading families
which controlled the economic and
political life in the country key
decisions were made by coalitions of
political parties which worked out
disputes among these elites Omar
Torrijos a populist general changed the
system in 1968 when he led a coup
against the civilian government and put
himself in charge of the country the
military took control of the political
system and began to integrate the urban
lower classes and the rural peasants
into the political and economic
mainstream of Panamanian society
Torrijos then turned his attention to
developing the Panamanian economy these
efforts included the development of
Panama as an international banking
center Torrijos was advised that Panama
could simultaneously become a tax haven
by eliminating income taxes and a bank
Haven by developing strict bank secrecy
laws along the lines of Switzerland by
using the US dollar as its official
currency and developing a legal system
which allows the formation of bearer
share anonymous corporations Panama
could become an ideal site for people
and institutions from around the world
to deposit their money without having to
worry about convertibility taxation or
disclosure
during the late 1970's and early 1980s
illegal dollars began to enter Panama
via private planes by private couriers
and passenger suitcases on commercial
flights and as air freight eventually
this activity was facilitated by the
Panamanian military who supervised the
offloading of cash into armored cars by
the end of the Carter Administration US
intelligence had begun to recognize
Panama's increasing importance as a
center for laundering US currency by the
early 1980s the Central Intelligence
Agency suspected that Panamanian
officials were involved in facilitating
money laundering for drug traffickers
US policymakers did not take any steps
in response to this evidence however and
official corruption in Panama spread
from money laundering to a wide array of
criminal activities including narcotics
trafficking by public officials their
relatives and associates
prior to Torrijos death in 1981 Noriega
began providing money-laundering
services for the Colombian cocaine
traffickers through their Miami
accountant and money launderer ramon
million rodriguez million rodriguez
testified that he had begun to rely on
Panamanian Defense Force officials to
assist him in laundering money from 1976
through 1979 before reaching a personal
agreement regarding the handling of drug
money with Noriega in 1979 Milian
Rodriguez testified that at that meeting
in 1979 he negotiated an agreement on
behalf of the Medellin Cartel under
which Noriega received a commission for
providing security and related services
for the drug money ranging from 1/2 of
1% to 10% depending on the services
performed according to Milian Rodriguez
between 1979 and 1983 the PDF helped the
Medellin Cartel launder billions of
dollars through Panama meeting airplanes
filled with cartel money from Miami at
the Pan
an airport guarding the money as it was
loaded into armored cars and delivering
the money to the Banco Nacional de
Panama million Rodriguez testified that
in May 1983 Noriega decided to eliminate
him as a middleman for laundering cartel
drug money
Noriega arranged to have information
about the money laundering activities of
Milian Rodriguez passed on to the DEA
the tip resulted in million Rodriguez's
arrest by the Customs Service and the
end of his money laundering career
million rodriguez believed Noriega had
him arrested to allow Noriega x' cronies
to take control of the money-laundering
business an assertion corroborated by
Jose bland owned an earlier testimony
before the committee the assertion is
further corroborated by a letter that
DEA Special Agent James L bramble wrote
Noriega on July 15 1983 to thank him for
assisting in the investigation of Milian
Rodriguez shortly after Milian
Rodriguez's arrest in 1983 sazar
rodriguez a member of Noriega z--
civilian group began referring drug
traffickers with currency to launder to
the bank of credit and commerce
international branch in panama BCCI had
opened a branch in panama in 1980
falling a period during which its London
staff cultivated relationships with then
President Arroyo general Torrijos
and Colonel Noriega I'm shot I won a
BCCI officer who had entertained a
number of the Panamanians in London
became the BCCI's Panamanian branch
manager in sworn testimony taken by the
subcommittee I'm shot Iwan denied the
allegations that he or the BCCI branch
in panama handled money from drug
dealers however the bank has
acknowledged having an account
relationship with Cesar Rodriguez which
included multi-million dollar loans for
more eye wands subsequent indictment on
money-laundering charges in Tampa
suggests he lied to the subcommittee
about his role in the money-laundering
business his testimony on this subject
has been referred to the US Attorney for
possible prosecution for perjury
according to Al Juan and officials of
the bank in 1982 Noriega opened an
account at BCCI with large amounts of
cash the account gradually grew to
around 20 million dollars through
deposits of several hundred thousand
dollars in cash at a time
Noriega instructed the bank to keep the
records of the account away from
Panamanian nationals and to book the
account outside of the country
Noriega then used the account to make
cash payments to Panamanian political
figures Iwan said that he assumed that
the payments were being made in
connection with the presidential
election scheduled for 1984 he said
Noriega gave the politicians handwritten
notes which instructed the bank to hand
over to them certain amounts of cash
Noriega then called the bank to say that
someone would be coming by with a note
of instruction and Iwan would give the
cash to the person with a note early
Panamanian involvement in narcotics the
Panamanian military first formed ties
with drug traffickers in the early 1970s
according to press accounts these
initial contracts were noted by the US
Bureau of Narcotics and dangerous drugs
the BND D which identified Noriega then
in charge of Panamanian military
intelligence as working with the
traffickers in 1972 while the United
States was negotiating with Panama over
the future control of the canal the
brother of the late General Omar
Torrijos moiss Torrijos was indicted
for smuggling drugs in Panamanian
diplomatic pouches US law enforcement
authorities learned that he was planning
to transit the Canal Zone which at that
time was under US jurisdiction and made
plans to have him arrested
however general Torrijos was alerted
that his brother was about to be
arrested as soon as he entered the Canal
Zone it was this tip that allowed Moises
Torrijos to escape capture during
consideration of the Panama Canal
treaties the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence was asked to evaluate
narcotics intelligence on Panamanian
involvement in the drug trade
the committee's then chairman senator
birch Bay reported to the Senate on the
BND DS evidence of involvement of
prominent Panamanians and drug
trafficking among those cited by BAE
were general Tory OSes brother Moises
Terios then foreign minister 1 tak who
was said to have signed the diplomatic
passports of drug smugglers and Rafael
Richard Gonzales the son of the then
Panamanian ambassador to Taiwan
moiss Tory Xhosas drug trafficking was
cited by some senators as justification
for voting against the treaty after the
passage of the treaty no further action
was taken by the u.s. to respond to the
drug related corruption in Panama indeed
the issue of official corruption in
Panama faded from public prominence
until Noriega took power following the
death of Torrijos in a plane crash on
July 31st 1981 Noriega z-- corruption of
Panamanian institutions the first ties
between the Panamanian military and
narcotics traffickers took place while
general Torrijos was still alive however
as general Noriega consolidated his
power the narcotics situation in Panama
grew significantly more serious as a
consequence the military took increasing
control of Panama's most important
institutions and used them not only to
generate revenue for PDF officials but
also to exercise control over the drug
trade Noriega gained control of the
customs immigration and passport
services Civil Aeronautics the National
Bank of Panama
the Attorney General's office which
together represented the major
Panamanian institutions with
jurisdiction over the narcotics trade
Noriega pushed legislation through the
National Assembly consolidating the
National Guard Air Force Navy police and
customs under a single command called
the Panamanian Defense Forces PDF as
head of the PDF Noriega now controlled
all elements of the Panamanian
government essential to the protection
of drug trafficking and money laundering
thus accomplishing two goals
simultaneously increasing his control
over Panama and enriching himself
Noriega had turned Panama's political
system into what one witness termed a
narco kleptocracy a political system in
which Panamanian government became
controlled by personal loyalties to
Noriega cemented by graft and corruption
and substantially funded with narcotics
money
according to Noriega z-- former
political adviser Jose blendin and his
former personal pilot Floyd Carlton
Noriega sparked neurs in corruption and
Panama ultimately included many of the
pdf's top officials among them were
major nivaldo madrina chief of the
national department of investigations
major Luis Cordova chief of the
Transportation Department of Panama
major Luis dust said commander Cherokee
region an area used by drug smugglers
for their operations major Cleto
Hernandez who simultaneously served as
chief of the Panama penitentiary and as
a liaison with the drug dealers major
Jaime Benitez commander cologne region
major Rafael Cedeno Noriega z-- personal
assistant major Hilario Trujillo
commander of the central zone and
captain Luis al who Noriega
simultaneously placed in charge of
Panama's anti drug smuggling unit and as
a liaison to the Medellin Cartel
ironically Kyel was at the same time
Noriega is representative to the DEA and
thus in a position to alert the drug
traffickers to whatever information the
DEA had provided him bland own told the
subcommittee that a group of officers
from the Panamanian air force also
participated in drug trafficking for
Noriega among them colonel
Alberto Purcell Lieutenant Colonel
Lorenzo Purcell and Maj Alberto fund Ora
as well as Air Force chief of staff
Marcos justine's all of whom enjoyed the
profits of the smuggling operations in
addition to these military groups
Noriega also worked closely with a group
of non military personnel who became
known as the civilian group this group
which included his personal pilots
engaged in a variety of criminal
activities at Noriega z-- direction
prominent members of this group who
handled illicit operations for Noriega
included enrique protect ricardo malonic
john and jorge Krupnick carlos whit
green jorge Novi the third Cesar
Rodriguez and Floyd Carlton Noriega
involvement in the arms business even
before Torrijos death Noriega had been
active in the gray market arms business
using his control of the government
security apparatus to arrange Panamanian
end-user certificates which legitimized
the shipment of arms to Panama once in
Panama
Noriega would sell the weapons to
whomever bid the most for them his
earliest clients included the
Sandinistas who were then trying to
overthrow the Nicaraguan government of
Anastasio Somoza the weapons were
purchased in Europe by Michael Harare
and Jorge Krupnick who worked with
Noriega the arms were moved to Costa
Rica for shipment to the Sandinistas
under the eye of Noriega sparked nur
Costa Rican security minister Gianni
echeverria although many weapons were in
sold to the Sandinistas many more wound
up in storage in Costa Rica when the
sandanista war ended in 1979
according to Floyd Carlton a partner of
Cesare Rodrigues and pilot for Noriega
the excess weapons were then marketed by
Panama to the rebels in El Salvador
Carlton and his partner Cesar Rodriguez
flew the guns into El Salvador in 1980
using Panamanian military aircraft on
one of the trips Rodriguez's plane was
damaged on takeoff and crashed when he
tried to land in El Salvador Carleton
who flew a second plane on the same
delivery mission polled says our
Rodriguez from the wreckage put him in
his plane and flew to Panama where they
both went into hiding when Salvadoran
officials discovered the wreckage of the
Panamanian Defense Forces plane the
origin of the weapons for the rebels was
obvious according to bland owned the
Salvadoran government formally protested
to Tory hosts about the weapons
deliveries and the general conducted a
superficial inquiry that failed to
explain the incident according to
Carleton the political crisis caused by
the crash subsided and the Noriega
weapons continued to expand Noriega used
his contacts with military intelligence
counterparts in the region to find and
develop weapons markets which he could
supply profitably one such market became
the Contras with the el salvador trade
slowing Noriega put his pilots to work
flying weapons from Panama to Costa Rica
for the Contras
according to werner lots many of the
pilots moved mixed cargos of guns and
drugs to the bases in costa rica dropped
off the guns and flew on to the united
states with drugs
Noriega also developed other criminal
enterprises to supplement the revenues
he was receiving from money laundering
weapons deals and narcotics among
Noriega 'he's business interests were
relationships with companies operating
in the cologne free zone
opened in 1953 as a center for duty-free
transshipment of goods in and out of
Panama
Noriega allowed the Cuban government to
establish companies in the zone the
companies repackaged embargoed Cuban
goods for export to the United States
and imported prohibited high-technology
goods from the United States for re
export to Cuba the trade in Cuban
seafood through Panama to the US became
particularly large other Noriega
business interests have included a
company owned by Noriega x'
brother-in-law ramon Cerio called Mara
nack which has had the monopoly on all
identity cards for semen in the
Panamanian Merchant Marine the identity
card business produces more than twenty
million dollars a year according to
blend owned Noriega also controlled the
liquor concessions at the Panamanian
airports the leather export monopoly the
company controlling the free zone a
television station a number of banks and
a variety of other businesses Noriega
and the cartel
according to Milian Rodriguez the cartel
chose to deal with Noriega rather than
other corrupt officers of equal rank
because they believed Noriega alone was
in the position to provide them with
both the intelligence and protection
they needed by mid-1982
Noriega was working with the medellin
cocaine cartel on several fronts first
he was laundering their drug money
through the agreement negotiated by
Milian Rodriguez second he permitted the
cartel to establish processing plants in
Panama including one in the province of
El darian in la Poma near the Colombian
border the plant was built as the result
of an agreement negotiated on Noriega as
behalf by Lieutenant Colonel Julian
Board WA Melo of the Panamanian National
Guard third he began to use members of
his civilian group to smuggle narcotics
directly
in 1982 Floyd Carlton was both a member
of general Noriega z-- civilian group
and general Noriega is personal pilot in
Carlton was arrested by the United
States and convicted on narcotics
charges in 1987
Carlton became a principal witness
against Noriega in the grand jury case
brought in the Southern District of
Florida that led to Noriega indictment
Carleton described in detail to the
subcommittee how he established a
narcotics trafficking business on
Noriega behalf with the Medellin Cartel
Carlton testified that he entered the
business of smuggling cocaine in
mid-1982 while working as Noriega 'he's
personal pilot carlton said that he had
several meetings with pablo escobar and
Gustavo Guevara two leaders of the
cartel who asked him to smuggle cocaine
from Colombia into Panama for the cartel
Carlton initially declined but changed
his mind after discussing the matter
with Noriega a few weeks later Carlton
testified that on his second meeting
with Escobar Escobar
offered to pay Noriega 30,000 to 40,000
dollars per load of cocaine and Carlton
$400 per kilo according to Carlton
Noriega advised Carlton that this was
too little and that he wanted $100,000
for the first trip in advance the cartel
agreed ultimately Noriega was paid
$100,000 for Carlton's first flight
$150,000 for Carlton's second flight
$200,000 for Carlton's third flight of
cocaine and $250,000 for Carlton's
fourth flight of cocaine carlton
testified that he was only one of
Noriega 'he's several partners in drug
trafficking among others were Cesar
Rodriguez a drug pilot who obtained the
planes needed to smuggle narcotics from
among those seized by the Panamanian
government from other traffickers
Noreaga x' rift with the cartel in May
1984 on the day of the Panamanian
elections the leaders of the Medellin
Cartel came to Panama to meet with the
former president of the country Lopes
Mickelson they had engineered the
assassination of the Colombian Minister
of Justice Lara Bonilla a week earlier
and needed protection and asylum until
the Fuhrer died down
Noriega told associates that the cartel
paid between 4 million dollars and 7
million dollars for Noriega protection
of individuals in the cartel during this
period however by mid-may Noriega became
concerned about the pressure he was
receiving from US law enforcement
personnel concerning the cocaine
processing plant he had allowed the
cartel to establish and Darien Panama
now that he was harboring the cartel
leaders Noriega feared that if he
allowed Darien to remain open the u.s.
might recognize that he had become a
partner of the Medellin Cartel he
therefore decided to allow the
Panamanian Defense Forces to conduct a
raid on the cartels cocaine processing
plant at Darien 23 of the cartels
personnel were captured in the raid and
the plant and equipment were seized land
owned testified that the Medellin Cartel
had paid Noriega five million dollars to
protect the plant in addition to
protection money for harboring them from
Colombian justice the cartel leaders
felt Noriega had betrayed them and began
planning his assassination Noriega who
was travelling in Israel learned of the
plot and decided to stay in London until
Arrangements could be made through Fidel
Castro to rescind the cartels order to
have him killed
Landen testified that Noriega personally
sent him to meet with Castro to solve
the problem with the cartel land owned
said that Castro proposed a solution
whereby the five million dollars would
be returned to the cartel along with the
machinery for the plant the twenty three
persons arrested in the raid on Darien
would be released
Noreaga agreed to the terms proposed by
castro the 23 people were deported and
the Panamanian government dropped the
criminal cases against the cartels
employees Noriega z-- us partners by
1983 Noriega 'he's willingness to become
an active participant in narcotics
trafficking became known among us drug
traffickers who began to approach him
for assistance in moving narcotics
through Panama to the United States one
American partner of general Noriega was
the rich Kalish organization which
smuggled significant quantities of
marijuana into the u.s. over a period of
more than a decade
initially the rich Kalish organization
had used the Cayman Islands to launder
money after learning that the PDF and
general Noriega were making Panama
available to narcotics traffickers the
organization approached Noriega and paid
him a $300,000 cash bribe in September
1983 Noriega allowed the organization to
use Panama as its base permitted the
drug traffickers to purchase a residence
near one of his own personal homes and
ultimately entered into a full
partnership with the organization
Noriega invited Kalish to become a
partner in servicios turista Coase a
business operated by civilian group
members Rodriguez and pre tailed as well
as Noriega Kalish made a $400,000
payment for 25% of the stock of the
company of which half went to Noriega by
the end of 1983
Kalish was negotiating for Noriega on
the purchase of airplanes
including a Boeing 727 to be used by
Noriega for money laundering
according to Kalish Noriega intended to
use that plane to fly money out of
Washington DC under diplomatic cover in
return for such favors Noriega provided
the Kalish drug smuggling organization
with military protection and favorable
treatment
Kalish himself received three Panamanian
passports including one Panamanian
diplomatic passport Noriega
continued to work with Kalish and drug
smuggling operations until kailash's
arrests and incarceration and Tampa
Florida on July 26th 1984 u.s. knowledge
of Noriega activities as a consequence
of the NSCs decision to prohibit Gao
investigators from receiving information
regarding US policymaking on Noriega and
narcotics the subcommittee cannot
definitely determine what US agencies
knew about Noriega and when they knew it
the GAO report to the subcommittee
chairman regarding the status of its
inquiry as well as a chronology of the
GAO s attempt to reach agreement with
the various agencies of the US
government and compiling the information
on general Noriega requested by the
Congress are included as an appendix to
this report however it is clear from the
testimony of a number of witnesses
before the subcommittee the Noriega
activities in connection with narcotics
have become widely known within Latin
America by the mid-1980s this knowledge
extended to some of Noriega x' political
opponents in panama by 1984 a prominent
member of the Panamanian opposition dr.
hugo spa de Fora began to publicly
criticize Noriega for working with
Colombian traffickers in the narcotics
business subcommittee witnesses
testified that Noriega arranged in
response to have Spadafora tortured and
murdered by members of the Panamanian
Defense Forces in September 1985 the
involvement of the PDF was confirmed by
a number of sources including Noriega
z-- personal pilot carlton and land
owned the murder of Spadafora focused
further attention in Panama on Noriega
involvement with narcotics and related
activities the most detailed account of
the evolution of US policy toward
Noriega provided the subcommittee came
from Francis J McNeil a career State
Department official who had been
ambassador to Costa Rica from 1980
through 1983 and Deputy Assistant
Secretary of the intelligence and
research
Bureau at state according to McNeal the
State Department never trusted Noriega
referring to him early on as the quote
Renta Colonel in tribute to his ability
to simultaneously milk the antagonistic
intelligence services of the United
States
end quote McNeal characterized Noriega
relationship with American intelligence
agencies as too cozy leading our
intelligence agencies to depend on him
and Panamanian intelligence for handouts
and treating Noriega as an allied
service MacNeil stated that the
consequence was that the u.s. took a see
no evil approach to Noriega which was
quote a true intelligence failure the
accountability for which rests with the
intelligence folk who had become Noriega
clients end quote McNeill described how
in 1980 the US was aware that says AR
Rodriguez was engaged in smuggling guns
to Salvadoran rebels while smuggling
drugs to the US the u.s. complained to
general Torrijos
who in turn ordered Panamanian officials
to quote knock it off end quote the
consequence was quote a de munition of
Panamanian involvement end quote
until Tory hoses death according to
McNeil the Spadafora murder and the
exposure of the involvement of a PDF
officer and cocaine trafficking quote
had upped the pressure on narcotics end
quote although the u.s. still had not
confronted Noriega directly on these
problems On June 13 1986 a lengthy
article appeared in The New York Times
describing Noriega as narcotics
trafficking quoting unnamed White House
and administration officials after the
article appeared the State Department
commissioned an investigation of the
charges which concluded that Noriega ran
Panama that Noriega was corrupt and that
quote we know for certain PDF officials
are involved
the cocaine trade but we don't have that
evidence on Noriega end quote
according to McNeal the analysis
recognized that quote not a sparrow
falls in Panama without him taking a
feather end quote and that quote Noriega
has to know about the drug trafficking
and is likely getting a share and quote
McNeal testified that a formal policy
review took place shortly thereafter in
1986 the participants in the review
included the Panama regional interagency
group and representatives of the CIA
State Department and Defense Department
at the meeting quote several of us
suggested in different ways that the
Noriega issue wasn't going to go away if
for no other reason than narcotics end
quote
however after the meeting quote a
decision was made to put Noriega on the
shelf until Nicaragua was settled end
quote
assistant secretary of state for
inter-american Affairs Elliott Abrams in
a public statement subsequently denied
McNeil's assertion that the u.s. delayed
responding to the Noriega drug problem
because of Nicaragua other US officials
who testified before the subcommittee
gave conflicting accounts of when the
u.s. first had information about Noriega
x' involvement in narcotics according to
a DEA agent based in South America the
u.s. first received reports linking
Noriega and narcotics before 1978
according to this official Colonel
Noriega and General Omar Torrijos were
then seen visiting Medellin where they
were met by drug traffickers this trip
and subsequent trips to Colombia by
Noriega and Torrijos were reported to
DEA headquarters by 1980 or 1981
according to Nestor Sanchez the CIA
liaison for Central America US officials
were aware of rumors that the Panamanian
Defense Forces and government officials
were involved in narcotics trafficking
but that there was no harm
evidence to confirm the rumors as fact
while Noriega was aggressively expanding
his criminal enterprises the US was
apparently unable to make any further
progress in determining whether the
rumors were true or false according to
General Paul Gorman former
commander-in-chief of the United States
Southern Command Corman told the
subcommittee that after he assumed his
position in Panama in 1983 he
specifically tried to find out whether
the rumors about Noriega 's criminal
involvement were true and was unable to
establish that Noriega was committing
any crimes
Gorman testified that he had been
assured by the US Embassy in Panama that
Noriega was cooperating with American
efforts to combat narcotics trafficking
Gorman contended that he only learned of
Noriega personal involvement in
laundering narcotics money in 1986 upon
reviewing a report of the president's
commission on organized crime a
different assessment was provided by dr.
Norman Bailey a former senior staff
member of the National Security Council
under President Reagan between 1981 and
1983 in testimony before the House
Select Committee on narcotics dr. Bailey
stated that at the time he was at the
NSC there already existed quote
available to any authorized official of
the US government a plethora of human
intelligence electronic intercepts and
satellite and overflight photography
that taken together constituted not a
smoking gun but rather a 21 cannon
barrage of evidence end quote of Noriega
z' involvement in criminal activity and
drugs dr. bailey testified that quote in
connection with his duties and in
collaboration with the White House
Office of Drug Enforcement he discovered
while at the NSC
that quote the Panama Defense Forces and
its high officials have been extensively
and directly engaged in or engaged in
aiding and abetting end quote drug
trafficking to the u.s. gun-running to
the Sandinista
as Contras Salvadoran guerillas the m-19
and FARC in Colombia illegal technology
transfers to the Soviet bloc and money
laundering end quote
according to the DEA between 1970 and
1987 Noriega z' name appeared in more
than 80 different DEA files however
there were no follow-up investigations
as these references were not
corroborated but were typically quote
third-party or hearsay information which
we cannot pursue very well end quote
less than eight weeks before Noriega was
indicted Drug Enforcement Agency
administrator John lon
told Admiral Murphy that no indictment
would be issued because there was
insufficient evidence against Noriega
william von Raab the Commissioner for
the Customs Service testified before the
committee that his organization had
evidence linking general Noriega and
narcotics trafficking as early as 1983
in April 1986 senator Jesse Helms as
chairman of the Western Hemisphere
subcommittee held hearings on Panama
which provided some public details about
drug trafficking by Panamanian officials
in those hearings Norman Bailey a former
Reagan NSC staffer testified publicly
that Noriega was quote widely suspected
of drug dealings end quote and that the
Organization of American States needed
to meet to restore constitutional
government in Panama and remove Noriega
in order to respond to Panama's growing
drug problem during those hearings
Raymond Jayma Kenan of the Drug
Enforcement Agency testified that the
United States knew that Panama was
becoming a money-laundering center a
transit country for narcotics on route
from South America to the United States
a transit country for precursor
chemicals principally ether used for the
production of cocaine and a center for
the local cultivation of marijuana then
Assistant Secretary of State Elliott
Abrams further testified that
United States also was quote aware and
deeply troubled by persistent rumors of
corrupt official involvement of
Panamanians in drug trafficking end
quote
following the hearings chaired by
Senator Helms a number of press accounts
provided further information regarding
Noriega x' narcotics related corruption
beginning with the front page the New
York Times article On June 12 1986 which
quoted officials in the Reagan
administration
and past administrations as stating that
they had overlooked general Noriega x'
illegal activities because of his
cooperation with american intelligence
by january 1987 The Reader's Digest
cited quote US officials and Panamanian
sources and quote as describing Noriega
as a key figure in the international
drug trade writing for the digest David
read quoted experts as saying that quote
Noriega and other PDF officers have
received millions of dollars for
permitting the traffic to continue
end quote why did the u.s. fail to
respond to Noriega allegations the
hearings chaired by Senator Helms
established publicly that there was a
significant body of evidence pointing to
Noriega 'he's involvement in money
laundering and drug trafficking as of
early 1986 yet the u.s. relationship
with Noriega continued to be a close one
up until the moment he was indicted by
the u.s. there were differing
explanations for this failure to
distance ourselves from Noriega earlier
than we did the former operations chief
of the South Florida Drug Task Force
Admiral Daniel Murphy stated that
information about Noriega was received
by lower-level government officials but
not passed on to policy makers according
to Admiral Murphy the allegations quote
were never considered that critical that
they should be at the highest level of
government and they were probably
reported at lower levels end quote
a different view was taken by former NSC
staffer Bailey and by ambassador McNeil
according to Bailey quote clear and
incontrovertible evidence was at best
ignored and at worst hidden and denied
by many different agencies and
departments of the government of the
United States in such a way as to
provide cover and protection for Noriega
x' activities while at the same time
assuring that they did the maximum
damage to those very interests that the
officials involved were sworn to uphold
and defend end quote
ambassador McNeil stated succinctly that
the United States was quote coddling
Noriega beyond any time when one could
reasonably doubt Noriega z' involvement
in drug trafficking to the United States
end quote because he was helping the
United States with the Contras
Bailey and McNeil's view is corroborated
in part by the factual admissions made
by the United States in the trial of
Oliver North in which the United States
revealed that Noriega had provided
Contras on the southern front with
$100,000 since July 1984 as well as by
other admissions in the north trial
discussed below
United States law enforcement agencies
also considered Noriega to be a friend
of the United States a belief largely
based on the significant amount of
information and assistance Noriega had
provided United States agencies over
many years this view was articulated by
a DEA administrator Jack lawn who in the
past had written Noriega letters of
commendation for his help in fighting
the war on drugs in a May 8th 1986
letter to Noriega lon stated the DEA s
quote deep appreciation for the vigorous
anti-drug trafficking policy that you
have adopted which is reflected in the
numerous expulsion from Panama of
accused traffickers end quote law and
testified before the subcommittee that
the DEA had had a long-standing
cooperative relationship with the
Panamanian Defense Forces in the areas
of crop
education narcotics investigations money
laundering and drug interdiction lon
stated that quote our narcotics efforts
in Panama continue despite the
corrupting and intimidating influence of
drug trafficking on government officials
and institutions end quote
lon stated unequivocally that DEA had
been granted every single narcotics
request ever made to the Panamanian
government in fact according to blend
own while DEA administrator Jack lawn
was referring to Noriega as liaison to
the DEA luis cal as quote integral to
the process
end quote of fighting international drug
trafficking KL was serving as Noriega x'
enforcer to eliminate competitors of the
medellin cocaine cartel by turning them
over to the united states one unintended
consequence of the close relationship
between Noriega and the DEA was the fact
that the Panamanians were able to share
DEA information with traffickers with
whom they were friendly as convicted
american narcotics trafficker steven
Kalish testified Noriega 'he's close
relationship with the DEA allowed
Rodriguez and his partner Enrique
protect to advise other drug smugglers
about whether or not their planes were
on a DEA watchlist
the DEA x' close working relationship
with Noriega may have influenced that
agency to ignore allegations it had
received regarding Noriega x'
involvement in the narcotics trade
carlton testified that in 1986 he went
to the DEA offering to testify about
money laundering drugs weapons
corruption and assassinations involving
Noriega
but when carlton mentioned the name of
general Noriega the DEA agents to whom
he volunteered the information became
upset carlton then decided that he or
his family might be harmed because of
the connections Noriega had with the US
embassy in panama and decided to say
nothing further
the DEA tried to reach Carlton by
telephone after his initial meetings but
no further contacts took place
the DEA stated that Carlton did not
mention general Noriega 'he's named
during his contacts in Panama with their
agency the difficulty of ensuring the
integrity of DEA operations in Panama
surfaced in another case involving a DEA
informant in June 1988 according to the
US Attorney's Office in Miami
the informant brought a collection of
documents relating to general Noriega x'
involvement in drug trafficking and
money laundering to the u.s. embassy in
panama asking that the documents be
sealed and shipped to the DEA office in
miami when the informant arrived in
miami the box containing the documents
had been opened and he asserted that key
documents were missing the informant
passed a lie-detector test and DEA began
an internal affairs investigation which
remains open it is clear that the DEA
continued to rely on Noriega even after
information had been developed regarding
Noriega x' involvement with drugs DEA
administrator lon wrote Noriega as late
as May 27th 1987 to assure him that
quote DEA has long welcomed our close
association and we stand ready to
proceed jointly against international
drug traffickers whenever the
opportunity arises end quote
more recently the DEA relied on the
Panamanian Defense Forces to carry out
arrests on March 29th 1989 in connection
with the indictment of 29 defendants for
laundering 433 million dollars in drug
money for the Medellin Cartel
the risk of relying on general Noriega
for such cooperation was highlighted
when one of the principal defendants
identified by the Justice Department as
Eduardo Martinez of Medina and the
cartels chief money launderer in Panama
escaped from the PDF after being tipped
off to the plan to rest Mae
messages the tension between law
enforcement and foreign policy
objectives appears to have led to a
series of mixed messages being sent
Noriega from various branches of the US
government this problem became acute in
1985 a time when Noriega was worried
that the u.s. might respond to his
continuing criminal enterprises
according to testimony before the
subcommittee Noriega recognized the the
war being waged by the Contras against
the Nicaraguan government was the
highest priority of many members of the
administration in Washington in
accordance with his past handling of US
officials Noriega sought to assure the
United States he would cooperate
according to Jose bland own Noriega met
with Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North in
June 1985 on a boat anchored off Panama
City to discuss Panamanian cooperation
with the United States in the conduct of
the war against Nicaragua in the period
when US intelligence agencies were
prohibited by the Boland Amendment from
quote directly or indirectly in quote
supporting the Contras Blandon testified
that this meeting led to an agreement by
Noriega to help train contra troops and
to permit contra leadership to enter and
exit Panama freely to facilitate the
conduct of the war Blandon testified
that during a second meeting between
Noriega and North Noriega suggested the
Panamanian units could be used in
operation on Nicaraguan territory
however Blandon had no information that
Noriega took action in response to
North's request
according to McNeil following the
meetings with north Noriega met with the
late CIA director William Casey on
November 1st 1985 a memorandum casey
wrote after the meeting suggested that
Noriega
left reassured the narcotics issue was
not mentioned casey justified his
failure to raise the issue in his
discussions on the ground that Noriega
was providing valuable support
for our policies in Central America
especially Nicaragua Casey believed that
Noriega understood the u.s. opposition
to drug-related corruption and that the
issue could best be left for the US
ambassador to Panama to handle however
other US officials concluded that Casey
had quote let Noriega off the hook end
quote
following the Noriega casey meeting the
US ambassador to panama everett briggs
complained that casey had given Noriega
the wrong signal and NSC director
Admiral John Poindexter was sent to
Panama to upbraid Noriega on the
narcotics issue a few weeks later on
December 17th 1985 Noriega met with
Admiral Poindexter and ambassador Briggs
Blandon testified that after the meeting
Noriega gave him the following version
of what happened
Poindexter told Noriega that a group of
military officers would have to be sent
out of the country because of their
involvement in the Spadafora murder and
that Noriega should reconsider returning
Nicolas Barletta whom Noriega had fired
the previous spring to the presidency
the message was considered a strong one
Blandon testified that regardless of the
understanding reached in Washington that
Poindexter would confront Noriega on his
drug problem Poindexter neglected to
raise the issue of narcotics or indeed
of any form of criticism of Noriega
Blandon testified that while Noriega was
meeting with Poindexter and Panama a
group of US citizens working as
registered agents for the government of
Panama were simultaneously meeting in
Washington with Konstantin min-jae's of
the National Security Council Mingus
informed them that the PDF would have to
be reformed Noriega would have to stop
dealing with the Cubans and would have
to call an election or install our new
foe arias as president Mingus said that
political economic and military pressure
would be exerted if Noriega did not
follow instructions however the message
was received as one
significantly softer than the one
delivered to Noriega himself by
Poindexter Blandon testified that the
mixed messages delivered in the KC
meeting the Poindexter meeting the two
north meetings and the Washington
meeting with Mingus led Noriega to
believe that the u.s. government was
divided and that he could play factions
within the government against each other
Noriega always chose to ignore the
tougher message and to work with those
who were giving him a softer one Noriega
may also have believed his problems with
the United States have been resolved as
the result of a quid pro quo with the
Reagan administration for his support
for the Contras a number of the
admissions in the north trial suggested
that the Reagan administration agreed to
a series of quid pro quos with several
foreign governments in connection with
their support for the Contras in the
case of Noriega discussions about such
quid pro quos continued through at least
late 1986 for example and late August
1986 Noriega told the US through one of
his representatives that quote in
exchange for a promise to help clean up
Noriega Zimmy j-- and a commitment to
lift the u.s. ban on military cells to
the Panamanian Defense Forces Noriega
would assassinate the Sandinista
leadership for the u.s. government end
quote
in response to Noriega x' offer
lieutenant colonel oliver north told
Noriega is representatives the US law
forbid such actions quote the
representative responded that Noriega
had numerous assets in place in
nicaragua and could accomplish many
essential things just as Noriega had
helped the previous year and blowing up
a sandanista arsenal
end quote according to the agreed
statements in the north trial Admiral
Poindexter responded that if Noriega had
assets inside Nicaragua he could be
helpful the u.s. sea could not be
involved in assassination but the
Panamanian assistance with sabotage
would be another story
end quote north then met with Noriega
with Poindexter's approval in London in
late September 1986 at that time Noriega
agreed quote to take immediate actions
against the Sandinistas and offered a
list of priorities including an oil
refinery an airport and the Puerto Sun
Dino offload facility in quote the
problem of mixed messages continued as
the United States moved closer to
indicted Noriega as late as November
1987 Noriega still believed he had a
second channel open to him which would
support him and his operations
Noriega 'he's belief was based in part
upon two trips admiral murphy made to
panama in 1987 murphy visited Noriega in
august and november 1987 accompanied by
Thomson Park and discussed what Noriega
might do to improve his relationship
with the United States Murphy said he
made the trips as a private businessman
however before he went to Panama he met
with top officials of the CIA State
Department Department of Defense NSC and
vice president's office including
Assistant Secretary Richard Armitage at
defense assistant secretary Elliott
Abrams at state then NSC director Frank
Carlucci and the vice president's
national security adviser Donald Gregg
when he returned from Panama he
debriefed these US officials as well
while in Panama Murphy met with Noriega
and with the Panamanian opposition he
advised Noriega of the hostility toward
him in the United States and the
administration and explored what it
might take to improve the atmosphere
with the United States
Murphy testified that he made
recommendations to Noriega regarding the
steps he could take to improve u.s.
Panamanian relations the steps included
turning government functions over to
civilians having fair and free elections
and meeting with the opposition
Noriega replied that Panama already was
control
by civilians and that elections were
established by law
Murphy felt that Noriega was inflexible
and after meeting with equally
implacable opposition leaders he
concluded that quote everybody was in
deep cement end quote and there was very
little business opportunity for him in
November 1987 Murphy reiterated his
concerns and suggested that Noriega
relaxed his control of civil liberties
as well there was no discussion of the
US government's concern about Noriega x'
drug trafficking at either meeting
Murphy testified that his trip was made
as a private citizen looking for
business but according to bland owned
Noriega interpreted his visit as a
message from the United States
government
Noriega believed that Murphy was
carrying the message that if he adopted
the proposed plan of reform he could
remain in power until February 1989
referring to the series of mixed
messages sent to Noriega former deputy
director of the Department of State's
intelligence and research Bureau Francis
McNeil summarized the situation by
stating that while the Department of
State was attempting to distance itself
from Noriega
the Department of Defense and CIA were
simultaneously sending him encouraging
signals conclusion general Noriega
provides the best example in recent u.s.
foreign policy of how a foreign leader
is able to manipulate the United States
to the detriment of our own interests
general Noriega recognized that by
making himself indispensable to various
US agencies he could develop US clients
who had become dependent on him as a
result they would be reluctant to pursue
intelligence on Noriega criminal
activities and less likely to
investigate what intelligence they did
receive Noriega also understood the
divided nature of the US government and
had attempted to play each agency off
against the others for example he
attempted to manipulate the DEA office
in Panama
by feeding US officials cases and
providing information leading to arrests
and seizures but which did not affect
his drug operations as a result DEA
focused on the cooperation it received
and ignored Noriega 'he's obvious and
ultimately quite public involvement with
the Medellin Cartel Noriega achieved
similar results in performing services
for US intelligence finally Noriega
recognized that so long as he helped the
United States with its highest
diplomatic priorities and as Terry hosts
had done with the Panama Canal the
United States would have to overlook
activities of his that affected lesser
US priorities in the mid-1980s this
meant that our government did nothing
regarding Noriega x' drug business and
substantial criminal involvement because
the first priority was the Contra war
this decision resulted in at least some
drugs entering the United States as a
hidden cost of the war
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you